INFORMATION SECURITY SYSTEM
(By Prof. Himanshu Gautam)
Objectives:
• Explain the objectives of information security
• Explain the importance and application of each of confidentiality, integrity, authentication
and availability
• Understand various cryptographic algorithms.
• Understand the basic categories of threats to computers and networks Describe
public-key cryptosystem.
• Describe the enhancements made to IPv4 by IPSec
• Understand Intrusions and intrusion detection
• Discuss the fundamental ideas of public-key cryptography.
• Generate and distribute a PGP key pair and use the PGP package to send an encrypted e-
mail message.
• Discuss Web security and Firewalls
UNIT — I
Attacks on Computers and Computer Security: Introduction, The need for security, Security
approaches, Principles of security, Types of Security attacks, Security services, Security
Mechanisms, A model for Network Security
Cryptography: Concepts and Techniques: Introduction, plain text and cipher text, substitution
techniques, transposition techniques, encryption and decryption, symmetric and asymmetric key
cryptography, steganography, key range and key size, possible types of attacks.
UNIT — II
Symmetric key Ciphers: Block Cipher principles & Algorithms(DES, AES, Blowfish),
Differential and Linear Cryptanalysis, Block cipher modes of operation, Stream ciphers,
RC4,Location and placement of encryption function, Key distribution Asymmetric key Ciphers:
Principles of public key cryptosystems, Algorithms(RSA, Diffie-Hellman, ECC), Key
Distribution.
UNIT — III
Message Authentication Algorithms and Hash Functions: Authentication requirements,
Functions, Message authentication codes, Hash Functions, Secure hash algorithm, Whirlpool,
HMAC, CMAC,
Digital signatures, knapsack algorithm Authentication Applications: Kerberos, X.509
Authentication Service, Public — Key Infrastructure, Biometric Authentication
UNIT — IV
E-Mail Security: Pretty Good Privacy, S/MIME IP Security: IP Security overview, IP Security
architecture, Authentication Header, Encapsulating security payload, Combining security
associations, key man2
UNIT — V
Web Security: Web security considerations, Secure Socket Layer and Transport Layer Security,
Secure electronic transaction Intruders, Virus and Firewalls: Intruders, Intrusion detection,
password management, Virus and related threats, Countermeasures, Firewall design principles,
Types of firewalls Case Studies on Cryptography and security: Secure Inter-branch Payment
Transactions, Cross site Scripting Vulnerability, Virtual Elections
TEXT BOOKS:
1. Cryptography and Network Security : William Stallings, Pearson Education,411i Edition
2. Cryptography and Network Security : Atul Kahate, Mc Graw Hill, 2" Edition
REFERENCE BOOKS:
1. Cryptography and Network Security: C K Shyamala, N Harini, Dr T R Padmanabhan, Wiley
India, lst Edition.
2. Cryptography and Network Security : Forouzan Mukhopadhyay, Mc Graw Hill, 2"d Edition
3. Information Security, Principles and Practice: Mark Stamp, Wiley India.
4. Principles of Computer Sceurity: WM.Arthur Conklin, Greg White, TMH
5. Introduction to Network Security: Neal Krawetz, CENGAGE Learning
6. Network Security and Cryptography: Bernard Menezes, CENGAGE Learning
Outcomes:
• Student will be able to understand basic cryptographic algorithms, message and web
authentication and security issues.
• Ability to identify information system requirements for both of them such as client and
server.
• Ability to understand the current legal issues towards information security.